[Music]
it is so much fun to be sitting across
from you dude dude it's great to see you
again you know I feel like we do this
once a year we we are really close to
that whether it's on camera or off and
one thing that got me thinking about
this show which by the way everybody
welcome to conversations with Tom bill
you Jason civil here today very much
was the evening that you and I spent
with Jamie wheel in the Petit ermitage
yeah like just out under the the stars
it was a winner even about all kinds of
[__] and it was one of those times where
because there were no cameras because it
was just three people riffing and
talking with no worry about how you come
across or where your thought process is
you could really think through it that
that really planted a seed for me to
start thinking is there a show format
where I can explore my thinking in real
time because I love impact Theory I love
what it's become yeah it's it is an
amazing platform for me to feature
somebody and to give them a platform to
really rock through the ideas that are
already solid but all of my change
happens in the researching process and
then I'm just trying to take them
somewhere where I know they [__]
shine and where they're really gonna add
value but it it wasn't allowing me to
advance my own thinking in real time to
push my ideas that are sort of at the
edge and everybody talks about if you
want to develop you've got again outside
that comfort zone you got to be reaching
for something that you kind of
understand but like you're just
beginning to graph grapple with it and
put it together and so wanted to create
something that was more free-flowing
longer format and more intimate more
intimate that's the [__] word I've
been talking to the team about that like
how we create that level of intimacy
intimacy is huge well it even we're
we've begun we have we break okay does
that seamless and wonderful Wow well
great to be here with you great to have
you thank you um I salute you for what
you're doing in the world it's been
wonderful to watch you grow from afar
you were so kind and generous to me the
very first time
a guest on your show I guess even before
impact the earth science a blast yeah
yeah yeah and I just felt an immediate
kinship with you and with your heart and
what with you want what we what with
what you want to do in the world and
it's just been great to see you shine
dude you really I don't think you know
how much you impacted my trajectory so
when I so I grew up in an age without
social media without the Internet and so
I was really suspicious of social media
when it came along yeah I was really
terrified someone's gonna steal my
identity that sounds so stupid now
especially someone that's had like so
much fraud you had to [__] deal with
that either through it but before it
ever happened I was like just ultra
paranoid so I lied about my birthday on
Facebook and all that fine
but my social did like I understood it
as a marketer and that was how we built
quest was all social media so I got that
but like I didn't understand I'm not at
this point I will say and certainly this
is true back then as well yeah I'm not
extroverted so I didn't have a need to
be in front of the camera or anything
like that and I was really resistant and
my chief marketing officer was like dude
I'm telling you marketing has changed
you really understood it in the
beginning but you're losing touch with
what it is now and where it's going is
this personal branding and really having
a voice and not letting the company be
nameless faceless and you talk about
that behind the scenes but you're not
really living at marketing I was like no
no I don't want to be out front like
that's not interesting to me for sure
and then he showed me your [__] shots
of awe and I was like holy [__] and the
level of of awe of your ability that I
had was it bothers me a little bit
because I was so convinced and we talked
about this last time but I'm so
convinced that it was natural talent and
I couldn't fathom that I could push my
skill set like that and that was the
first sort of shot across the bow that
made me think [__] am I really prepared
to let somebody outpace me that hard let
me see if I can do this isn't it
interesting how our sense of self can
get agitated when when we witness
something that
I guess reflects or mirrors something
within ourselves that we feel like we
want to let out but we haven't been able
to yet it's a it's a trapping of the ego
when the fact that someone else shines
feels like it impedes upon our own
capacity to shine it's almost like we
come from a scarcity mindset and we
think that there is no room for two
people to shine I'm like well that guy's
excellence somehow diminishes the space
in which I can stand and I've
experienced that as well like I've
experienced that feeling I know that
disquiet you know it's it's it's somehow
the existence of another negates my own
but they can't be true it's not true you
know what I mean like that that that is
that is that is a trapping of the ego
that is also a trapping of comparison
you know I think comparison is only
healthy if it inspires you to want to do
better yes not if it makes you sane and
bitter yes which it can do to have to
all to all of us dude you know it's so
weird about that to me though yeah
proximity is is such a huge part of that
you compare yourself to the people you
see every day and I know you love movies
so yeah there was a line in I got I got
my Silence of the Lambs mmm that low
really [__] lame oh my god the movie
so good and this moment land of me
really hard he said you don't seek out
things to covet you covet what you see
every day
ah the chills so good and that is one of
those where the people that you're
around they're going to influence you in
a terrifying way because you're just
around them so you don't think to look
beyond them they're the people that you
encounter and this is why I think people
have to be so careful with who they
follow online how to cultivate their
online world because it used to be you
couldn't get too freaked out there were
only so many like incredible people
around you yeah but now it's like [__]
you can curate this feat of people who
are extraordinary at the very thing that
you want to be extraordinary Atman you
there farther ahead and you
can convince yourself that you can't get
there and it becomes like this where
you're you're in this weird thing where
you're inspired by them but like you
said it's also diminishing their sense
of self you have to be it's very
interesting right because they say you
know on a small scale you become the
people that you hang out with yes this
is the mutual mental mirroring that
occurs when your interface with other
humans you can't help the process of
osmosis by which you mirror and/or
acquire the qualities of that which you
surround yourself with including the
people you surround yourself with and
but what can also happen is you can
compare yourself to the people that
you're around and that might be
oppressing in a constrained environment
like high school where you're limited to
that scale of that world and so if [__]
man if like that's the popular guy and
you can't be popular like your [__]
there can only be one prom king or there
can only be one guy that's the best at
math and one of the kind of liberation
that one of the Liberation's of
graduating high school is that you can
graduate into a much bigger world where
you're not as constrained what you're
free to find your voice and there's
enough room for everybody to be who they
want to be but but then what happens now
with people like us like you were saying
okay so now you're not surrounded
necessarily just by the physical people
that are around you which is again as a
constrained limited size now you're also
surrounded by the feeds you follow
you're surrounded by the instagramers
that you follow and so every time you
scroll you become what you behold but
you also compare yourself with and it
can give you the illusion that the world
and the the marketplace is smaller than
it actually is and so it's like [__]
that guy's got a million followers
like he's eclipsing my capacity to have
a voice or that guy's got 500 million
likes he somehow eclipsing the integrity
of the work I'm putting out but that's
also an illusion and I'm reminded of how
much an illusion that is simply you know
you you fail to realize the hedonic
adaptation it used to be oh your video
gets 10,000 views that's cool oh your
video get a million views that's
now it's not cool because that
[__] getting 15 million views
but guess what dude when you get
yourself out of this the matrix like I
guess trappings of those comparisons on
social media and you go back to the
original high school scale I just got
back from South Paulo Brazil and I was
keynoting at the singularity summit and
there were maybe two thousand people
there but when you go back from the
Internet to the meet space and you see
two thousand individuals and how many
people that actually is would you get
excited by two thousand views probably
not well you get excited by two thousand
comments probably not but when you have
the physical encounter with two thousand
people you I guess you you you remember
how powerful it is to even reach one
person do you know what I'm saying
totally and so there is freedom in
realizing that like you got to do the
content because it fulfills you and you
got to do the content because you trust
it will find those it needs to find and
sure work to scale and work to grow it
but also realize that at the end of the
day like you know your capacity to
impact one person somewhere should be
enough do you know what I mean does that
make sense
everything until the last sentence so I
respond violently against the idea of
it's enough to impact one person and the
the reason is I really really think that
that is okay so I think everything comes
down to worldview and I think it is very
okay if somebody is truly mapped a
worldview that says it's enough to
impact one person I actually get that
and I don't want to talk somebody out of
that and and if that's where you are and
that's what you value and you have a
neurochemical response I help that one
person and all of my labor was for that
and I'm okay with that
that isn't my frame of reference that
isn't the value system that I've taken a
long time to construct so I'm writing a
book right now and it is utterly
fascinating how it's forcing me to
really crystallize my thinking and when
I really try to stop to identify why I
act in the world the way that I act
and you said something a minute ago you
become what you behold and I think you
also become what you desire to value or
what you decide to value the problem is
most people the the desire to value
things happens based on proximity where
they grew up with their parents like
with the culture around them likes all
that without realizing it's all it is
the matrix so the matrix is this you
can't see it you can't taste it you
can't touch it it's everything that's
around you but what people don't fully
understand is all of that was a choice
you just weren't making the choice
consciously and so you can decide to
value something new and my my life's
work is about okay how and why do you
decide to value something new in the
house pretty critically important but
not to to get too far afield from where
I started so my thing is I have chosen
over time to value scale I didn't have
to choose that but I did choose that and
now I've reinforced it in my mind so
many times that I have an actual
neurochemical response to the scale and
when you say like oh it's enough to help
one person I immediately my mind jumps
that I know yeah I imagine helping one
[__] person and I'm like Jesus Christ
all of this energy and effort has to be
it has to be played or deployed against
something a vision something you're
trying to do and achieve now I don't
want that ever to happen by accident and
so part of what I'm deploying my
energies against is my vision of scale
it is saying I have chosen to value this
I want to impact a lot of lives that I
don't want to have live to only help one
person largely because I would deploy a
totally different strategy so it's like
if my strategy works to one-on-one like
a social worker really help like
individual people and to be very
meaningful in their lives i get i think
that's [__] beautiful
it just isn't the value system that i
have built into my own life so I have
this visceral response when people say
that and err enough and and honestly if
I'm real God if you want to just crawl
inside my mind and I stop like with the
sort of hedging I think the reality is
that isn't a win for most people and
they're that
is the psychological immune system
kicking in and saying basically even if
you fail it's okay now to tease all of
that out would take a whole [__]
episode on do you feel like even if you
fail that's okay
yes definitively and that's well that's
very important because okay so you want
to reach as many people as possible
which is a beautiful endeavor a desire
to make a dent in the universe a desire
to extend your hand towards others and
impact others and sleep better at night
knowing that you've made a difference in
the lives of others and if you fail
let's say at reaching a billion people
but you reached 300 million instead are
you gonna be okay and and furthermore
you know a question that I have for both
of us is like what is it that we are
ultimately sharing with others that we
feel will positively impact their lives
now
I imagine from you it's your experience
in overcoming obstacles and allowing you
to become so successful in life so that
others can realize that when they run
into difficult moments that they start
to question themselves that they have
the capacity to overcome those obstacles
and those insecurities and those
second-guessing chatter of the
overactive default mode Network and that
they can in fact thrive so sharing your
own experience becomes a meme that you
can pay on forward in the hopes that it
infects others with optimism and a sense
of possible is that fairly accurate that
that's the first half of it the second
happen is I want to give them an
instruction manual on how to actually do
it yes so my my whole thing this this
really did it was a two-step thing I big
brother for a kid for a and F years his
name was rashon and I completely failed
him and and I just had like a like this
really surprising emotional moment the
other day so I recorded a video that
called the master plan video and I want
to like Babe Ruth I want to call my
[__] shot and say this is exactly
what we're doing and 15 years from now
when you realize that we have executed
against this [__] step by step for
over a [__] decade and that like
we're really I have the chills in my
head that people will realize this was
truly a master plan but to get them to
understand it I I have to start with
rashon and I had this wave of like I
think for the first time in my life I
allowed myself to just say it I failed
him and in saying it's so naked Lee it
was just really really heartbreaking and
so I tried to help him and I fail
because I'm too young and too stupid I
don't understand myself yet I still have
a fixed mindset I'm totally [__] lost
I'm insecure I'm a mess and the I I hope
that I showed him that somebody loved
him that's like my one hope but I
definitely did not give him the tools to
change his life
flash-forward 15 years later and I have
the tools I know what I did I have the
self-awareness I've walked myself
through this insane transformation that
I truly believe any out of average human
can do and in trying to like pass it on
to my employees because I had about a
thousand of my employees group really
[__] hard men like really I used to
think they grew up what hard like in the
inner cities watching people get shot to
death being involved in gangs like just
unimaginably hard and I was like okay
wait this reminds me of rashon I'm not
gonna fail more people how do I convey
this and so I start getting obsessed
with this notion that it it was learn
about for me and therefore it is learn
about for other people I did not have
any entrepreneurial skills or instincts
when I started business none whatsoever
and so how do I codify this how do I
hand it off and in trying to do that I
realized the layer one is inspiration
motivation spiritual entertainment and I
noticed with some pride and a whole lot
of terror
that I had a two hour declining impact
on people's lives for two hours I could
make them believe that they could do
anything but if they didn't stay with me
that would in a declining arc they would
go from you know right after hanging out
with me they felt like they could take
on the world and then a half hour later
he's a little more distant an hour later
and then by two hours was nothing
Jamie wheel who we both know and you've
had on one of your shows
once described what you just said he's
so witty with language he called it
saccharine catharsis so catharsis
obviously is a deeply meaningful
psychological experience of deep
learning and revelation and healing you
know catharsis is when you're cracked
your set you crack yourself open it's a
kind of bliss [__] crucifixion to death
and resurrection but he says that that
can also be induced right or mediated by
an experience you know whether it's a
staged experience or natural experience
but that sometimes that catharsis can be
not inauthentic but it was like it was
like I'm not opposed to staging
experiences of transformation I am NOT
but I think that we have to be careful
and again staging the experience in trim
it can just be you lecturing at somebody
for two hours in a powerful environment
in which they get caught up in what
you're saying I mean I'm not opposed to
that that's what I do in shots of awe
you know what I mean like we're doing
the same thing in that sense but that we
have to be careful that the audience
doesn't get so caught up in what is
ultimately a staged experience whether
it's a video that I've prepared for them
or a lecture that you prepared that they
have a catharsis that's not a real
catharsis because it doesn't have the
integration and it doesn't have the
follow-through and it doesn't have the
practices that then they need to deploy
in their lives to make that a lasting
change and so he used to call he says
that a lot of times motivational
speakers lead this three-day workshop
you know change your life that the
audience can get caught up in the frenzy
in the altered state of consciousness of
that workshop and have a saccharine
catharsis saccharine of course is the
artificial sweetener we put in coffee
that's actually terrible for you so that
it's not it's not a real catharsis
you know it's like it's like cheating
which is I think similar to what happens
when people think that if they take a
psychedelic like ayahuasca our magic
mushrooms for one night that they're
gonna have they're gonna pierce the veil
and everything will be different and
while no doubt you can have glimpses of
that which is beyond the known
when you take psychedelics in the right
environments if you don't integrate if
you don't go back to your day to day
default world and implement changes and
codify learnings in a way that makes you
whole
right and then can incan and can bring
some of those insights into practical
daily endeavors then again it's us then
it's an artificially induced catharsis
with no with no lasting impact so and so
it's exactly what you were saying it's
like they have it for two hours and then
it wears and then it wears out you know
give me this step-by-step how the [__]
do people do that and this is the so the
punchline to what I was saying before
this I want to get to the point where I
can and and this is what the book really
is it is a step by [__] step do this
repeat this stand here say that like as
as much as that's humanly possible with
the brain so walk me through integration
in fact I don't know that there is a
human being I have ever encountered that
is able to integrate ideas more
powerfully than you what is your process
for integrating the catharsis so that it
actually becomes a part of you and you
have that ability and dude if it's
[__] just repeating it a thousand
times
awesome I I don't care what the answer
is but how the [__] do you get all of
these ideas to mesh in your mind to
become a part of your race yes that's a
really great question and one of the
things that I sort of fight against is
is similar to muscles it doesn't matter
if you train for three months and you
build your body real strong because that
you stop for three months they will
atrophy granted there's an element of
muscle memory and you can sort of
recover that fairly fast but still what
that tells us is that there's got to be
some kind of daily or weekly practice
what are you incorporating was your life
well okay so for example for me one of
the most
healing insights that that I keep coming
back to is just this it's just the power
of overcoming the trappings of time
right being caught up in the future
worried about what's next and or
regretful or or clinging to what once
was and is no longer which is the
platitude cliche bumper sticker like be
here now that Baba Ram Dass says that's
the solution to so many of our anguishes
and Agony's is to just be present now
I've had that insight 1000 [__] times
I've talked about mental health as being
freedom from self freedom from chatter
the flow that you find in no mind these
transitory enchanted moments in which we
gasp for air compelled into in the words
of f scott Fitzgerald aesthetic
contemplation we barely understand nor
desire face to face with something can
measure to our capacity for wonder I
mean that is that is the great aha right
that is the divine realm these are the
divinations of the mythopoetic spaces
that we enter where we feel connected
with something larger than ourselves and
we are in the eternal right now I've had
that a thousand [__] times
dude the the the amnesia of two days
later when I go back into the cycles of
the day to day has shown me that the
only answer is simply to incorporate
practices that allow me to revisit the
present and for some people that can be
meditation for some people it's yoga for
some people it's simply building an
environment around them that broadcasts
to them the qualities that they wish to
aspire to on a daily basis well real
[__] might be the set you've built for
yourself like every day that you wake up
what do you do what is a chase I chase
okay so for me for me it's aesthetic
experiences combined with novelty movies
like what are we talking about rabbit is
huge for me interest and we go to
Amsterdam
Amsterdam I just got back from Brazil
yeah so you've heard of Michael Pollan's
new book how to change your mind I've
heard of it I've recently become super
interested in him but I am NOT okay I'm
a total novice highly recommend you
check out his new book how to change
your mind
it's about psychedelics and healing but
in the preface of the book there's a
very interesting passage that I will
share with you he says that anything
applies to answering this question of
how I do it
he says brace basically that one of the
things that we have to get used to about
our default setting is that the brain is
essentially future tense you know and
and then towards the future angle
towards the future with a low-level hum
of anxiety as our default state and the
reason for that is a hundred thousand
years ago in the savannahs of Africa if
we were not thinking ahead about what
was around that next Bush we were gonna
get eaten by predators and so we are the
descendants of those that were the most
neurotic and future-oriented those that
were blissfully in the Garden of Eden
Eden got eaten okay and he goes further
he says the brain is like an artificial
intelligence program in that it takes in
data from the present right and it
compares that data with data from the
past and then it immediately makes
inferences about the future right so
it's a prediction machine and the line
he uses is the good news is I'm seldom
surprised the bad news is I'm seldom
surprised right so you're mitigating
against future threat and if you do that
effectively you survive yay no surprises
here but the problem is that there's
also no delightful surprises there's
also no finding yourself off the
reservation in the present senses
heightened you know deeply engaged you
know when the stakes are high because
you get so good at cushioning your life
by saving money in the bank and
preparing adequately for the future and
putting yourself in a safe environment
that then you grow stale and then you
grow bored that's why some people are so
poor all they have is money yeah and so
my mom used to tell me that quote when
little all the time because I wanted so
badly to be really rich my grandfather
was very wealthy and I want to be rich
like my grandfather and she was like
yeah some people are so poor all they
have is money but anyway so so this is
the default setting right low level hub
anxiety future-oriented behavior and
future-oriented attitude and so
leapfrogging from the present right
leapfrogging into the future and
concluding what this already is and
never engaging with them now so then how
do we fix that
so Michael Pollan writes one of the
things that commends travel art and
novelty right and certain kinds of drugs
whether it's cannabis or other
psychedelics is that these experiences
get this they knock they knock off line
they block all signals forwards and
backwards so the future modeling right
the expectation building and future
modeling that is automatic gets knocked
off line and the comparison between the
now and the past gets knocked off line
so certain kinds of visceral art travel
certain drugs encounters with radical
novelty anything that radically
dissenters you write block all signals
blocks all signals forwards and
backwards
hurling you into the flow his words
the flow of a present that is literally
wonder full wonder - full wonder being
the byproduct of that unencumbered sense
of first sight to which the adult brain
has closed itself right and so for me
that that is right there I'm like I need
then to organize my life to curate my
life around regular encounters with
experiences that violate my expectations
I need to thwart the default future
modeling of my brain the jaded miss and
the bin there's and seeing that of the
adult mind the part of me that thinks I
know what this is I understand this I've
seen this before
I've been to that neighborhood
what that's gonna be oh I know what this
party is oh I know what that crowd is
all those things that allow us to
dismiss engaging with the world by
assuming that we know what we're
engaging with and therefore assuming
that we don't really need to pay that
much attention in fact it's also Michael
Pollan who in an earlier book called the
botany of desire said what is banality
and boredom except techniques that the
educated mind employs against experience
so that again so that it can get through
the day without being continually
exhaustingly astonished so that that
sort of adult arrogance and then
assumption of that we think that we know
anything you know is often just a way of
protections against engaging with a
world that's actually full of mystery
and because I'm guilty of doing this I
then have to I have to seek out
experiences that violate my expectations
because then what happens is I'm in
virginal terrain I'm off the reservation
and I have to finally I guess re-engage
with what is happening now and find out
who I am in that moment and and if I
have regular access to those kinds of
experiences then I get I get new data
new data for my videos new material with
which to integrate but I guess for me
the process of integration is to put
into practice practices that hurl me
into the present right that's super
interesting said the knowledge from that
is not enough the knowledge from east
each of those instances of finding
myself in the present the healing that
happens in each of those instances is
not enough it's like I got to go back to
the Wishing Well is it going back to the
well or so this originally started with
because that that whole notion of
getting yourself out of context I think
is really really interesting violating
your ex mutation yes super powerful I
definitely had not thought of that
yeah but the this started with
integration like how do we integrate the
ideas that we have so when I think about
what I do it comes back to you and I'm
not sure this is exactly right so this
is me at the edge of what I already
understand trying to grow up and and
find something new but I think of this
as obsession so I always tell people if
you want to be
successful in business let me tell you
one of the like key factors nobody talks
about it is so [__] real I don't even
know how to like get it across if you
were not obsessed you're not going to
win why because you need your mind to
constantly like worry over that problem
to to like you run like if you've ever
chipped your tooth running your tongue
over that chip over and over and over
and over and over and over like your
mind has to do that with these big
problems otherwise you're never going to
be able to solve them like you or it
I really believe cognitively I'm quite
slow and I think because people see me
at the end of a very long journey they
think what do you mean like you're able
to put ideas together very fast now I'm
not not unless I've already thought
about them over and over and over but
I'm very good at making something a
problem and I use that word in quotes
but making something a problem worthy of
my attention so that I'm planting this
notion in my subconscious I'll actually
sometimes think about here's an idea
that I want to process overnight or
right before I meditate here's an idea
that I want an answer to or something I
need a solution or ideas that I'd like
to connect somehow because I need my
subconscious mind more than anything to
just be like working over this problem
over this problem over this problem and
if somebody like I listen to everything
at 2x if it's normal human speech and
partly because if there are gaps where
somebody is like pausing to think too
long my mind will immediately go back to
that problem and I really believe that
for me that process of integration has
been choosing to value that my mind is
gonna work on this problem that feeding
into obsession and rewarding myself for
obsessing over something picking a very
small number of things to really obsess
about so that I'm looping over them to
spend time meditating not just
meditating to empty my thoughts but what
I call Finca tating where I'm taking
that alpha wave brain state that I get
into from trying to empty my thoughts
and then deploying that against some
problem that I'm trying to do or I find
in terms of what you're talking about of
creating these moments where you're
you're putting yourself in a certain
cognitive place hot showers do that for
me so even though I've become obsessed
with cold showers I always end
because my mind goes into what feels
exactly like a meditative state because
I was sure pre told myself to worry my
mind and I'm using that word worry in a
way that I think people misinterpret I'm
I'm setting my mind to walk along an
idea and because I I do that as a force
of habit and not as something that's
just natural I think I do already have
an inclination towards that fair enough
but then I've I've grabbed a hold of
that process and said I need to make
this a part of my life I don't just want
it to be something that I skim across I
really want to like take this thing and
now really [__] understand it and so
in that process so I've set my mind to
it and in that process the goal that
I've given myself is to understand it to
the point where AI could explain it to a
five-year-old and be I can do it in
steps and by combining those things then
I find with one addition that you have
to create space for your mind I find any
people to get me well I guess I guess
you could say that um you know I think
that the diseases are the pathologies of
mental distress of mental health these
days are diseases of personal personal
crisis diseases of getting too caught up
in our own narrative about who we are
and what we're doing here and are we
successful enough for no we're not
successful enough and what's gonna
happen with this relation assuming of
course like Maslow's hierarchy of needs
assuming that you know you you're fed
and and you have enough of an income to
have a home and you've met these like
basic needs then then the needs that
have to do with like personal meaning
and personal impact and what is the
meaning of life in the face of being a
mortal being and all these things become
really problematic one of the things
that they've I don't know if we talked
about this last year when I was here we
talked a lot about anxiety but that that
the diseases of personal crises that
that stem from too much anxiety and
depression are diseases of excessive
self-consciousness excessive rumination
so becoming becoming I sound like a
cheesy Buddhist but becoming overly I
identified with the voice in your head
and and or the ego as they say now
granted and Michael Pollan says to sue
the ego is necessary you know the ego
gets the book written the ego takes care
of the machinery right it makes sure
that you get enough rest that you feed
yourself well that you put yourself in a
comfortable shelter that you surround
yourself with nice people the ego is the
executive conductor of the orchestra
it's necessary right but when the ego
becomes overly caught up with itself you
know pass the point pass the threshold
of taking care of the machinery so that
then you can function well in egoless
States an ego that becomes overly
identified with itself goes from being
the executive of the orchestra to a
tyrant that is hyper vigilant and always
on guard right and then this creates the
excessive mental chatter that is
associated with the excessive rumination
of the diseases of anxiety of depression
it's actually a brain that has become
too ordered and and robbing cart Hart
Harris who I believe is in the Imperial
College of London and is doing all this
research on psychedelics and and mental
health came up with a theory called the
entropic brain theory and basically the
theory and this is based on fMRI scans
that they did with all these people is
that essentially people who suffer from
depression and anxiety the diseases of
personal crises have brains that have
become too ordered obsessive thinking
okay um North Korea instead of the
United States so it's like the ego is so
obsessed with protecting itself and or
and or scaling and or climbing and or
succeeding that that that you become
that the self obsession becomes like a
storm in your head you're never good
enough or you're anxious you're gonna
fail you're comparing yourself to others
or all these things right and and then
eventually those those those thoughts
and those patterns of thinking they
become so fixed because there's the
grooves are so overly carved on right
that again it's it's it's it's too much
order in the brain too much
identification with the self and that
what is actually needed then
for healing is regular encounters with
experiences that smack you over the face
and as they put it shake the snow globe
what happens when you shake the snow
globe all those ski routes that you've
been you know those obsessive thoughts
those self-identifying thoughts that
again some of them are necessary the ego
gets the book written the ego gets you
to bed at night the ego has you work out
and get your things done but too much of
that then you know then you over
identify with the self which is also
multum Utley a transitory thing anyway
that it's gonna cause you pretty much
suffering in the end so shaking the
snowglobe as they say resets the system
reboots the system and also offers you
encounters with modalities of awareness
in which all those obsessive intrusive
thoughts aren't there and whether it's
flow or whether there's just the the
stillness or the meditative trance of
finding freedom from your own voice can
be very healing and I guess for me the
integration is simply realizing that I
have to on a regular basis just like
nutrition you got it you can't just eat
healthy today and then the insights of
that healthy meal are gonna carry over
you got to eat healthy all the time or
the majority of the time so I need to
expose myself or put myself in
situations that humble the voices in my
head that quiet the inner chatter enough
that allow me to merge with my
environment to become enmeshed and or
entangled with a majestic encounter with
nature or a beautiful song or a
lovemaking session with a lover took
time and I'm gonna stop you there yes
please because you you say things
sometimes that are so rad but you're so
poetic that you blow past them and I
promise myself and this I was like the
[__] next time I'm with this guy and
he says something like that I'm gonna
stop him so you become enmeshed with
your environment that's really
interesting are you talking about the
breakdown of the ego and that like when
you say enmeshed yeah I'm talking about
losing track of your
own boundaries and forgetting yourself
for a while now those of us that are
highly disciplined highly driven highly
ambitious and go on highly caught up in
our own thoughts and and highly caught
up in thinking about what we think about
things can create a kind of rigid wall
between us and the world because we've
thought about everything so much we know
what everything is and so we can rely
more on our own thoughts than on our
experience or encounter with something
outside of ourselves because it's just
like I know what that is I just got a
guard of the vessel and I don't have to
really engage with that losing track of
your own boundaries temporarily can be
like a kind of vacation from yourself in
which the normal pre mapping of
circumstance and pre mapping of
experience and pre expecting what's
going to happen that your brain is doing
automatically is knocked off line and so
what happens is it's like you find
yourself porous and unguarded and it's
it's the unexpected feeling of like
being struck by something so magnificent
that it takes your breath away and and
and I think just these are transient
experiences of eternity because they
take place in a liminal space outside of
time but when you have them and then you
you pop out on the other side of those
experiences and finally and you you know
find yourself again a little bit that's
that's when you get new material because
that experience like where'd you go when
that was happening you know I I just got
back from Kauai and I was one of the
most beaut it's one of those beautiful
islands in Hawaii and we went to this
famous and Napali coast which is this
rugged Jurassic Park like coast of the
island that you can only see by boat and
it's like I mean it's like this might
sound really vulgar but it's like it's
like nature
like like ejaculating on your face you
know it's like it's like extact you
lations of amazement there's actually
there's a guy who was the the first
Westerner whoever took psychedelic
mushrooms with with indigenous cultures
in Mexico and he wrote for Life magazine
when he when he about his experience
back in the 60s and his his description
is apt he said that he spent the evening
uttering ejaculations of amazement but
but the point is yeah like we just we
need it we need to experience humbling
in comprehension you said on a regular
basis humbling why that word well
because there's a kind of intellectual
arrogance that comes with being a person
that spends their whole life trying to
make sense of things understand things
and optimize things to make them better
which is something that I definitely
tend to do and I infer that you do it
too and and and that that's fine right
like you're you to be brilliant and
ambitious and intelligent and to put so
much labor into making sense of things
and distilling things and explaining
things to others like what a beautiful
endeavor as long as every once in a
while you know we we experience a kind
of gobsmacking you know we witness
something so beautiful so magnificent so
unexpected that oh my god it's an it's
just it's new material it's it allows
for it like a new aha
in everything and I think it's just like
I just think we just need that I know
that I need that on a regular basis so
my integration practice is simply
realizing that I have to go back to the
wishing well like I just that that that
this is like something that needs to be
part of my diet on a regular basis
because otherwise my tendency is to
simply collapse back into patterns that
serve me for a little while and
eventually become problematic you know
what I mean you you're putting poetry to
something that haunts me I think more
than just about anything else in my life
so I read this tell me what haunts you
bro it this really doesn't tell me table
that are used to listening me have heard
me talk about this before but if you
studied that people who've won Nobel
Prizes they almost always get a Nobel
Prize in their 60s for work they did in
their 20s and a quote bubbled up out of
that which is genius as a young man's
game and as somebody who feels like a
late bloomer that's definitely a part of
my identity like it really took me a
long time to develop self-awareness I
didn't get into business until I was in
my late 20s like it it took me a very
long time to wrap my head around a lot
of things and I've always felt like I'm
just a step slower than a lot of people
and so I'm okay with that like that
doesn't actually damage my sense of self
as long as I can keep that window open
forever my opportunity for genius if you
will so when I heard that quote I was
like [__] you no way like who are the
outliers in that and thankfully that
piece where that quote came up was
talking about a guy who was one of the
few people to ever win multiple Nobel
prizes and he's continued to produce
relevant work into his later years and
he said my whole thing is every 10 years
I have to reinvent myself and I I really
really really want to believe even
though I know there's a part of just
like the level of brain plasticity does
diminish over over time I think that's
unfortunately a reality does not go away
and it never drops to zero but it
definitely you're not as plastic as you
get older but I think a big part of the
reason that so much profound work is
done in one's 20s is because it's that
moment where the the notions that you've
been [__] around with are now
beginning to congeal and useful wisdom
and you have the skillset with which to
deploy them so you've learned all this
[__] it's coming together in your head
your brain has finally developed at the
age of 25 it comes together in this
highly usable way but it's not become
like calcified Dogma yet so you're still
open everything is new you're having
these ecstatic Jack you lations
ejaculations is you're you know mumbling
ah into the universe and it's like you
you're at this magic moment where you're
finally competent but yet you're still
open and so when I hear you talk about
all that stuff it feels like you're
saying you have
you have to using your words shake the
snow globe as a way to remain open
because you have all this competence
your brain is like grabbing onto it it's
defining you more and more you're
becoming more ordered that I'd never
heard it said like that but that makes a
lot of sense in in that way where it's
like okay the risk becomes I calcify and
I'm no longer open to new experience I
no longer go back to the wishing well I
don't have new ideas all my genius was
when I was young but the calcification
actually like if you think of bones as
being your [__] skeleton you can move
around and do [__] all you need you need
enough calcification for your bones I
said the ego is necessary the ego gets
the book written the patterns of
behavior that make you effective in the
world no doubt are necessary but that's
that that the same governing mechanics
that underlie the ordering processes of
the ego which is the default mode
Network can become metastasized when
people suffer from the pathologies of
anxiety and depression so the default
mode network the ego that keeps border
over the machinery the patterns that
serve you can also be can also lead to
patterns that trap you yep
so right so the patterns that serve you
can become the patterns that trap you if
they metastasize just like healthy
tissue can become cancerous
when it metastasizes and so the shaking
of the snowglobe
is a necessary reboot you know the data
in your computer is important if it's a
reflection of all the documents and
everything you've put into the you know
that you've learned and that you've
written down that you organize and do
you've assemble together it's very
important but what about like the whole
fragmentation that happens with all that
data unless you like defragment the hard
drive every once in a while and I
imagine that that's the what robbing
cart heart Harris from Imperial College
of London is referring to when he says
that in this case they're talking about
psychedelic experiences taken in
controlled environments that introduced
actually disorder into the brain
temporarily and by flooding the brain
with disorder it's like instead of
taking the same freeway to work your
neurons the way they communicate with
each other you're taking all these side
root side roads all of a sudden and so
people have this temporary you know five
our experience of egoless communion with
the divine but it turns out that the
last
afterglow is the couple comes from
shaking the snowglobe and then popping
out on the other side feeling like wow
like I just went through something that
called into question many things in my
life many certainties in my life and
that being hung upside down for a while
like that was amazing because I got to
behold the miracles that we live next to
often and ignore you know it's it's like
that Yeats quote says the world is full
of magic things patiently waiting for
our senses to grow sharper and it'sit's
the same thing that causes hedonic
adaptation you know that flower is
stunning and it'll stop you in your
tracks once twice three times but the
fourth or fifth time you don't even see
the flower anymore because you're busy
doing something else and that's fine but
maybe two weeks later you need to get
knocked over the head by something and
gob some actually you remember the
flower and so it's it's I guess
ping-pong and back and forth between
like highly ordered and disciplined
states and then absolute an ecstatic
surrender there was a wonderful Venn
diagram that my friend made from the
imaginary foundation and and basically
here it was a discipline was one of the
circles and the other circle was
surrender and then there was a circle in
the middle that overlapped them both and
was called flow you know and I think
about yeah 30 seconds ago you could not
have convinced me that I would be like
yes a render but saying it yet drawing a
line to flow that makes sense yeah and
also another term for it is is calling a
discipline surrender mmm chick send me
hi said accepting limitations is
liberation and that's not and that's the
guy that wrote the book on flow
Csikszentmihalyi kind of the term well
this is a this is a fantastic quote
that's actually something that I've been
thinking about a lot lately because I
have labored intentionally to give
myself as much freedom as possible in my
life you know I worked in television as
a presenter I hosted TV shows for
Current TV five seasons of brain games
origins I did that to have been doing
shots of awe you know doing a lot of
speaking and I probably like kind of put
more effort into generating speaking
opportunities for me because it's like
okay like it's it's one-off gigs that
pay
well that give me the maximum amount of
freedom it's like aside from like going
wherever I'm booked I'm like okay I have
a booking in Europe let's stay in Europe
for three weeks and explore booking in
South Africa let's stay in South Africa
for three
you know radical freedom but too much
freedom without constraint is actually
problematic because it can give you a
kind of cognitive vertigo and decision
fatigue
you know I open up Netflix sometimes I
browse it for ten minutes
I see [__] 11 things that I want to
watch and then I hover back and forth
between deciding which one is more of a
priority to watch tonight then I browse
a little bit more see like five other
things I want to watch and then I'm
stressed from the 15 minutes I spent
browsing Netflix and then I closed it
and I end up opening iTunes and watching
a movie I bought two weeks ago that I've
seen three times because it's familiar
and comforting so too much freedom just
like too much discipline is equally
problematic and so then I stumbled upon
this chick send me Highline they said
accepting limitations as liberation it's
like okay well choose our constraint
like choose a hobby choose a career
choose a [__] city that you're gonna
move to for three months like just
[__] choose it you know you just know
it's not forever but like commit to it
impose a constraint so that inside that
constraint you can be free
dude I agree with that violently yeah so
one of my big frustrations with people
that they want they don't have passion
in their life they want to start a
business but they don't know what
business like whatever just [__] pick
like and it's one of those it really
does just come down to just pick nothing
is ever going to feel like a magic
answer nothing nothing yeah and people
have and and we reinforce it in pop
culture the sense that hiding within me
is some great passion yeah and I need to
do an archaeological dig I need to
uncover that and then everything is
gonna be great in my life and the
[__] reality is that nothing is ever
gonna feel right it's never gonna feel
like the right movie or whatever I know
that feeling so [__] well and you
simply decide and in allowing yourself
to decide with with no sense of like
this is
going to somehow dictate the rest of my
life it's a [__] decision and the
most important thing is to not hesitate
and so my wife and I have a sort of joke
inside joke line where if you do
something and you hesitate we say your
hesitation has almost killed us once
again and just just to brilliant sort of
enjoyably remind each other that there's
no like where we go to eat doesn't
[__] matter it's being afraid to make
a decision that is wildly problematic
and that will echo through your life and
some terrifying ways but just saying
we're gonna eat here even if you get
there and it ends up being a substandard
experience so [__] what you didn't
hesitate to make a decision this is this
is at the moment one of my Achilles
heels because I became successful and I
had all that freedom and so making
choices when there is no constraint
sometimes will deplete my my cognition
until I'm fatigued that my time I do
make a choice I am too tired to enjoy it
so this is like it's like FOMO but take
it to the next level so FOMO everybody
knows FOMO with a fear of missing out so
recently the term that comes to mind for
me is the fear of future regret mm-hmm
you know and that's a big one and it can
be something as tedious it's like okay
I'm in the mood to shoot some new shots
of all material I never outline or
script my videos my videos are always a
response to something meaningful that
transpired so what I do is I try to
design for a stage I try to design for
an experience of surrender of egoless
surrender so that on the other side of
that I'll have new material like you
know I plan for delightful surprises and
then trust that the material that will
come through in the end will be great
for a shot so far so then I might be
like okay well so where do I want to go
for a couple weeks to shoot is it is it
Amsterdam is it Copenhagen is it South
Africa is it Switzerland I mean these
sound like high-class problems but I'm
just talking about an example because
the degree to which I'll over deliberate
about saying well if I choose this what
if it ends up not being amazing and then
I'll
wish I would have chosen that instead
it's such a intoxicating and
and polluting example of excessive
rumination getting in the way of
realizing that actually no matter what
you choose if you evoke an experience of
radical presence in any of those choices
you'll experience the timeless wherever
the [__] you are and that it's only in
the timeless that the healing will occur
and so I've been trying to practice a
little more of like snap decisions
without thinking about it too much you
know and then just trusting yeah and
then and then and then making sure that
once I'm in that place that I that I
commit to to the surrender here's what I
find even more interesting about that so
I think that because we're so obsessed
with reproducibility like when you do
when I do have an encounter in a place
that was transformative that was healing
that I got gobsmacked by inspiration
that all this material came from
I want to bookmark that place on a
bookmark that moment I want to bookmark
that circumstance and then the next time
element what do you want to do next
month I want to go back to that place
where that thing happened I don't know
that that's true I'd have to want to you
want to go back to that place where you
felt that creative and you had that sort
of flow experience that's right but I
will always in my brain will always go
to the last place in which that happened
and it creates a kind of tunnel vision
that makes me think that it has to be
there this is where it's fascinating to
me how different people are because that
that wouldn't be a trigger for me but
one the thing that I often whenever I
have something that I don't feel that
I've earned that I didn't work my way to
that ability okay then I have a real
fear that it won't show up for me when I
need it and so that's another reason
that I don't value things that were
given to you like I have absolutely no
sense of pride or anything over how tall
I am right so that's just like I didn't
do anything to earn it - why the [__]
would I give a [__] so but things that
I've worked my ass off for then I can
feel like I know it's gonna be there for
me when I need it because I have worked
it's a process like it was something
that I could sort of grab ahold and
bring to me but really fast I want to go
back to
where you were saying about like making
snap decisions which i think is really
important but part of what makes snap
decisions so powerful to me is I think
there are there are actual real
consequences to making a poor decision
and that's what makes being able to make
a snap decision so powerful because you
really may make a snap decision and it
really may be a suboptimal outcome now
you've got a way to deal with that which
is to find a way to be present when
you're there so that it actually is
still the gobsmacked and you remind
yourself that you can have that moment
[__] in a god what are those chambers
called the sensory deprivation right
fear you don't actually need any
stimulus from the outside you can take
yourself there in a mental place so I
think that's a really smart way to deal
with it but the very thing this goes
back to my notion of value hierarchies I
value decisiveness in and of itself
why because I choose to do and believe
that which moves me towards my goals and
when I think about the ultimate thing
that releases me from anxiety from
things that would otherwise make me feel
badly about myself it is that driving
value of hey does thinking you're an
[__] does that move you towards your
goals which by the way my like top-level
goal nothing is higher than this thing
is I want to feel good about myself when
I'm by myself I want to recognize that
life is a very weird cocktail of neuro
chemistry so at the end of the day
that's the only game you're playing but
fulfillment which I'll say is shorthand
for feeling good about yourself when
you're by yourself is this weird [__]
thing that survives even like absolute
like a painful down experience and you
can be in the middle of that down
experience and still have a sense of
like no no I'm proud of Who I am I'm
proud of how I'm dealing with this
situation
and so because that's like my highest
aim is to have that the only sort of
neurochemical state that I have found
that is essentially bulletproof I can be
up I can be down and it gives me this
even keel sense of self and Worth and
respect and all of that stuff and being
decisive is one of those things that is
intrinsically valuable and it does so
often move me towards my goals that in
and of itself even in a momentary moment
where it may give me a sub optimal
outcome I know it is far better to
invest in
being decisive because indecision
indecision always leads me to a sub
optimal outcome even in the rare
occasion where I did [__] and debated it
for so long that I finally ended up on
an answer that's correct and and this is
where I get into my cancer analogy of of
building yourself the thing that you
think of is as you is so [__]
complicated and it's made of all these
different things values a sense of
identity beliefs rules in your life
habits routines like they all come
together in this so intricately
interconnected way that's why you use
cancer it's like you can't tell where
the cancer ends and the the normal
tissue begins it's just so intermixed
and teasing out what any one of these
things is would be next to impossible
and I say that because part of the
reason that I so value decisiveness is
because I've realized the utility of
momentum and momentum isn't just speed
it's it's getting you and others pointed
in the same direction and moving at
speed and because I know that momentum
is so valuable in terms of striving
towards your goal basically whatever
your goal is quite friendly that you
have to end up valuing decisiveness so
it's like it's so interesting that you
and I are looking at essentially the
same thing but we're looking at it in
like these radically different ways and
and going back to what you were saying
earlier like I so see in myself the the
I have created the separation between me
in the world in a way that is so hyper
aggressive and yet what I long for are
those moments of shaking the snowglobe
like I'm constantly trying to do both
and we touched on this briefly the last
time we talked where it's like holding
two competing ideas in your head is so
critical and being good at that like I
know when to say no no I need to be that
ultra regimented super strict very
predictable to myself and to others and
then I know other times where I've got
to [__] shake this up I've got a
radically and now I'm trying to quote
you here radically decontextualize
myself right and I think you so nailed
it with the notion of
texts like have you ever seen someone
that you've seen multiple times and a
part of your brain is like you know them
but you're like who the [__] is this
only because you're seeing them out of
context and it's moments like that where
I realize holy hell context really
matters
have you had Rick Doblin on your show
I've never even heard those sounds put
together okay beautiful he's the creator
of maps the multidisciplinary
association of psychedelic studies and
not to bring up psychedelics again but
they are in vogue these days and the
work of maps in particularly is
important they're working primarily with
MDMA MDMA people know it as ecstasy the
drug I must want to try used in you know
it part of like rave culture in the 80s
and 90s and subsequently banned what
most people don't know is before it was
banned and used by club kids it was
actually primarily being used by
psychotherapists for marriage counseling
interest yes it's a subset of
psychedelics called in pathogenic s--
that MDMA falls into in the sense that
they are empathic genic drugs they open
up the heart and increase empathy so
Rick Doblin and maps have no doubt from
the research realized that these these
is a substance that should be brought
back into psychotherapy to work not just
with marriage counseling but with
post-traumatic stress disorder and
post-traumatic stress disorder for those
that don't know is like let's say you're
serving the army and you see some
horrific violence and service and then
you come back and you can't integrate
what you've seen into your day-to-day
life and and in your your nervous system
is permanently altered by that traumatic
experience and so you bring that
agitation that anxiety that panic that
distressed at the doorstep of every
moment your past experience your past
trauma
now colors everything you encounter now
your past is over determining the
present right and it turns out that one
or two sessions with MDMA and a psycho
and a psychiatrist in the room with an
average PTSD person people actually with
treatment resistant PTA
one or two sessions and they no longer
meet the criteria of PTSD that's so
[__] crazy Huard okay so so so so
here's what's interesting about that how
does that work how does that work well
the the best description is in the same
way that trauma can semi permanently
alter your nervous system an experience
that is of such darkness and gravity can
make it so that you you know the body
keeps the score as they say so you bring
that past trauma to the doorstep a very
moment and it colors how you see the
world the opposite is also true an
experience of such sublime heart-opening
radiance can act as a kind of inverse
PTSD so now you've seen what is through
the looking-glass now you found the pot
of gold at the end of the rainbow now
you've seen the promised land and from
that optimal arousal zone that space
that MDMA is able to evoke for people
then you can do cognitive Repat earning
you can go back and examine your trauma
you can remember things and put them
into different context you can
contextualize them differently yes
through that lens and the spontaneous
self-healing that takes place in the
body at the level of the nervous system
is undeniable so III experienced this
with the nurse twice you've done MDMA
yes get the [__] out and I did it in a
therapeutic cause me through therapeutic
context the most amazing experience of
it was the radical self-acceptance that
it allows you to sit with and marinate
in now a lot of people that are
ambitious and I'll probably group myself
into this if I was psychoanalyzing
myself suffer from a narcissistic wound
so those that need to achieve usually
that stems from some early experience
when they felt they were not enough
I believe the line is if I am not
lovable for Who I am then I will become
lovable for what I can do and what I can
achieve and granted I
think it's unhealthy to have a desire to
make something of yourself the desire to
achieve is a healthy drive but the
degree to which that desire comes from
thinking that you are unworthy if you
don't achieve that desire that's
problematic and MDMA because of these
empathic genic qualities and allowing
you to encounter and be in dialogue with
yourself from a radical self-acceptance
neurochemical space is so [__]
powerful because we're not talking about
narcissistic self-love or self obsession
you're talking about actually having
compassion for yourself and forgiving
yourself and accepting yourself people
have these talk about ecstasy and
catharsis as Jamie wheel would say
it'sit's really transformative and
that's just me alone with the nurse oh
absolutely
they hold space they hold space they
provide a mirror so if you having these
revelations they nod and they think they
dig at you to keep going they're not
meant to introduce their own material
into the nurse and not a therapist well
it's kind of the same the same the same
thing you have to realize this is not
fully legal yet even though even though
with the FDA where it phase three
designations for breakthrough therapy so
we're almost we're almost at full
legalization but right now people still
do it on their own if they want
experiment but anyway I then had the
experience of experimenting that was
just me with with the nurse of
worldspace but then I wanted to try that
in a relationship I was a marriage
counselor what happens if I try you know
MDMA with my girlfriend you know at the
six-month mark and at the nine-month
mark of our relationship now I believe
that this PTSD idea is something that
all of us to a certain degree are
afflicted with there's the trauma of
just being born
there's the trauma of growing up
divorced parents being bullied in school
being insecure being sensitive and
rejected and key moments in your life
like we all carry trauma
and we bring that trauma to the doorstep
of every moment in many ways we bring
that the most into our relationships and
our patterns of neediness and
codependency and its need for control
and have to do with these patterns so to
firstly experience that amount of
self-acceptance in the face of somebody
that maybe you were seeking for their
validation of you you know so many of
the interpersonal dynamics are like you
need the approval of your partner but
what happens when you approve yourself
and you're able to be around somebody
you love but not need their approval
that's an interesting thing that can
happen and then also to witness them and
behold them with no self concern because
a lot of the times I'm like I love you
but I love you for how you make me feel
or I love you for the fact that you're
giving me companionship so I'm not
lonely or I love you but I want to
control you through the MDMA lens you
get to behold them and you get to love
them unconditionally unconditionally
means you're not attached to an outcome
you're not even attached to them staying
with you you actually that is not a
concern whether they stay with you or
whether they find somebody else in that
moment you get to know what it's like to
just want them to thrive simply because
it feels so good to shine love on them
and that's very powerfully healing too
and I think you know your cells are a
technology that turns experience into
biology so I think that in some ways
simply undergoing that open-heart
surgery of the psyche through a process
of just experiential osmosis will seep
into the pores of your day-to-day as
long as you integrate in journal and
talk about what has transpired but I
think for me the powerful thing was to
witness myself my truest self in a state
in which I could be who I was and then
realizing that who I was was wonderful
do you call back on that experience is
that how I tried to I tried to I mean
there there's patterns of behavior in my
life that maybe are not so useful I get
caught up in a ambition bubble I get
caught up in the making money bubble I
get caught up I go back to like oh I'm
lonely why isn't she texting
me or you know what I mean like that
happens but I but I try to remember I
try to remember you know step back and
like remember you know we just had a
neurosurgeon on health theory yesterday
and he was talking about how you get in
a electrical rut just the same that you
can get in sort of a behavioral rut so
as the neurons begin to wire together
people understand how that creates an
efficiency but he said a lot of people
don't understand that you have an
electrical firing pattern that also has
an ease to it so if the default network
are the things you think all the time
then the part of what makes something in
or part of the fabric of the default
network is the electrical firing pattern
and he said one of the ways you can
disrupt he was talking specifically
about depression is you put an electrode
right into a certain part of the brain
and then like a pacemaker it changes the
electrical firing pattern nothing
changes about the physical structure of
the brain which you also can do over
time but he said without needing to
change the physical structure of the
brain just change the electrical firing
pattern yeah and so when I think well
that's what Steven Kotler said neurons
that fire together wire together I
wasn't percent yeah and what what
fascinates me is when I think about
psychedelics and where I think when I
think about where all this technology is
going and the way that a single [__]
session like you're talking about can
create permanent and lasting change it
was something like 80% of people that do
it in a particular setting where they're
being walked through and it's very acute
exciting no longer meet the criteria
crazy right so I'm like whoa whoa whoa
what I know about the brain is neurons
have fire together wire together but
that's an overtime thing so going back
to what you were saying about not just
an overtime thing because think about
trauma that exactly singular experience
if sufficiently powerful can that fire
together and wire together and scar scar
tissue I mean yeah you can build muscle
over time which is to get them back to
the long term thing fire together wire
together over time but if you if you
grab a nice and slice yourself that's
gonna cause an instant scar just from
one time not from cutting every day so
that's how trauma works and that's how
the inverse of it works well how do we
just reverse work without drugs that's
what I want to know now that I'm opposed
to it by the way you know what Valley
you know what
Lee said though knowing they asked him
all about drugs he says I am drugs so we
are we are like we are neural chemistry
nothing that is introduced by these
external ecstatic technologies is is
something that cannot naturally occur in
the brain
you know people describe the MDMA state
as something similar to the post
orgasmic halo but lasting for like five
hours you know so it's it's a highly
concentrated experience and you could
argue that it's like it's kind of like
you can play you can learn to play a
guitar but then there's what happens
when you turn on the guitar amplifier
you know and so I sing seen through this
lens yes sure it's MDMA is not something
you want to do every day you want to
integrate some of these lessons and you
want to be able to synthesize an MDMA
like approach to living for sure because
it's a glimpse of the perfect human
state but I think it's gonna be a lot
harder to get people to deploy the
practices necessary to get there over
sufficiently long amounts of time rather
than to be able to offer them which is I
believe what these therapies are gonna
offer a chance for this this one really
deeply meaningful encounter so that they
can taste it for sure so that they can
experientially taste it for sure and
then go back and you know fetch water
and chop wood you know yeah to use the
famous phrase all right I want to ask
you how do you approach learning like
the so you've been called a DJ of ideas
and what I really want to understand is
how do you get like if I'm a DJ I go to
iTunes and I download a song or I go to
the vinyl shop and I pick up the record
how do you go about approaching getting
these new ideas that you can then
synthesize I think that I the process of
finding myself in a engaged and
receptive State is always gonna be a
kind of magical realm that I have to
create the conditions for but I but
other than that there's nothing I can do
do you have any memory and so the
not I don't have any like specific
disciplined practice to memorize quotes
no I mean when a court is really good I
write it down because but but I but
typically what makes me want to remember
it is because the words makes so much
sense and are articulated in such a
concise manner but loaded with so much
truth and and and and expository power
and that they expose they reveal that I
can't help but want to write it down and
remember it because it's it just feel
well they're the same reason that
there's bumper stickers with certain
phrases and not with others but it just
makes me it makes me feel like like
remembering that means remembering all
the wisdom that is associated with that
so rather than memorizing pages and
pages and pages and pages and pages of
knowledge I just memorize one quote that
will uh that will prove that that that
quote triggers the unconscious with by
flooding all the material of acquired
knowledge related to that quote that if
I tried to memorize those pages and
pages of pages pages I wouldn't you know
I'll give you one example and again just
to answer your question of how I create
how I try to learn these things is I
tried to cultivate a state of mind in
which I'm most receptive and I'm most
receptive typically when I'm well rested
when I eat well when I exercise when I
have novelty when I'm present and how do
you pick your books or is it books books
its articles its I have to trust
serendipity you know I have to trust
that the dots will connect with
something that at some hunch I've been
having that's been looking for an answer
and then stumbling upon the answer in
like some tweet or some article that has
like some link to something and you know
that's that's a magical space but for
example recently you know I am very
interested in in truth and human truth
in the truth that heals us but I'm also
an empirical thinker and I believe in
silent in science and I believe you are
entitled to your opinions but not to
your own
facts right like I understand this we
need that nowadays and yet right art is
the lie that reveals the truth mythology
is not true from the outside but it's
true from the inside there are empirical
facts and there are poetic facts and
even though poetic facts may be less
accurate than journalism and describing
the details of an event they
nevertheless reveal truths that are
beyond the literal grid as Allen's
ipython sedia sometimes fiction is more
truthful than reality
you know how do you reconcile this idea
of like the scientific lay or the
empirical objective layer of reality and
the interior subjective level of reality
with its own set of you might call them
poetic facts so I think about this all
the time because in my shots of awe
videos I'm sometimes talking about
technology and innovation and and and
the importance of scientific discovery
and human enterprise and this and that
I'm talking about a lot of objective
empirical things but then I often talk
about inspiration transformation
catharsis things that we better that are
healing that happened from within that
that live in the realm of your own
personal personal mythology and the
realm of poetic faxes how do you
reconcile those two things so this is a
whole mind map of associations there and
if a material for a thousand videos no
doubt and I finally found one [__]
line from Ursula Le Guin that
encapsulates the whole thing this is in
fact this was a whole book of opinions
and ideas and mind maps linked together
the front of the book would have this
Ursula Le Guin quote and hat tip to a
brain picker for tweeting it or writing
about it science describes accurately
from the outside
poetry describes accurately from the
inside science explicate s-- poetry
implicates both celebrate what they
describe but like I mean how much doubt
dense how beautifully dense
is that's it right science describes
accurately from the outside
poetry describes accurately from the
inside yes science explicate s' yes
poetry implicates yes so it's like okay
I needed to remember that cuz it's so
[__] perfect just like those four
sentences ring like truth you know they
feel truth like truth and so that's that
will be something but then I just like I
know I have to remember that that's
gonna be relevant humans are really
[__] different any my is so like when
I think about the one I love being
around you because I think you you
assimilate information that I find
utterly fascinating in a way that I do
not assimilate it and so mmm what what
intrigues me is would I respond to that
quote if you weren't saying it and I
think the answer is no I think I let's
assume I've read that quote now it's
like yeah and then just moved on but
when I hear you say it sure then I'm
like [__] and I see you doing like the
movements that you get by the way we're
the same both times you did it so
there's clearly some I for you for sure
around those words your excellency I
would see one that would be an example
right there of me which could be I could
be a stand-in for nature or some
experience you're having I'm violating
your expectations and that's what's
making the line resonate whereas when
you were reading or skimming or speed
reading because that's optimizing like I
have friends who listen to podcasts at
2x I don't know if they're minimum okay
so that might have been a line that came
in front of your field of awareness and
that you were like oh yeah I know what
that is and what is this what is this uh
that's the thing there isn't scene
that's at the adult mind uh I reckon it
you know it's just fine we all do it
it's it's um it's kind of like a codec
for digitizing video you're taking
pixels that are not changing very much
in the frame and replacing them with a
single stand-in and the only pixels that
you're changing are the ones that
require changing and it makes the file
size smaller so we do that same thing
with the world you know there's certain
things that we have to engage with that
are changing but the things that are
static we rely on there
models in the bin there isn't seen that
savvy at all tonight and that is good
most of the time but it's not good
because it's often not a good filter
about what gets to get in and and
meaningfully touch you or reach you and
my problem which I think we probably
both share and maybe it's not a problem
for you but I call it a problem for me
is that I'm also very good at doing
uh-huh I'm really [__] good at it
dude I'm like I'm like the expert I like
uh-huh yeah yeah yeah but I also know
that when I go ahh then I'm like I'm
like in my head like Mackin a ting you
know like nothing's really and it's only
when something goes boom like that's
beautiful
that's poetry dude right that's poetry
those are the moments of poetic
transformation it's like it's like that
line from Dead Poets Society when Robin
Williams is saying you know um science
engineering mathematics these are noble
pursuits necessary to sustain life but
poetry love poetry these are the things
we stay alive for and so i ultimately do
i want to reach people yes i want to
succeed yes do I want to make money yes
do I want to feel like I'm contributing
in the world yes but all those things
are tiny they're things I got a tick
from the box just like eating and
sleeping so that I can then go back to
the wishing well go back to that the
mythopoetic trance III maybe I'm a plate
honest somebody said this to me recently
I was with a psychologist to hang out
with in Brazil so Plato wrote about the
platonic realm or the realm of ideals
this kind of universal
space of consciousness where things
become archetypal I like like living in
that space as much as possible
everything else is just taking care of
the mechanics taking care of the
procedures but the but the archetypal
space is the space of myth sitting
around the campfire the space of
inspiration the space of being played by
a melody this is really interesting have
you seen Jordan peterson and sam harris
debate yeah my thing is like you you
guys do understand that the only problem
is that you're approaching the world
from fundamentally different places like
sam is saying that the when you look at
the world through the lens of logic it's
the it's the only way forward and Jordan
is saying when you look at the world
through the lens of emotion right
science the what you were saying in the
quote right yeah the two differences
neither are wrong they're just two
different approaches to the world and
when you mistake your own representation
as the only representation for sure and
you can have these two extraordinary
people who who seem to really respect
each other and obviously get along
swimmingly but but they're as they're
debating these ideas it's like it seemed
so fascinating to me that that that one
simple insight seems to be the only
thing that that holds them apart which
is it is two different ways of
explaining the world yeah and it's funny
it's I'm glad you brought that
particularly example because that's
exactly what they often talk about and
and I'm friends with Sam Harris I love I
love his nuanced analytical mind and
I've never met Jordan Peterson but I'm a
fanboy there's a bunch of rants of his
particularly when he talks about music
and transcendence or the healing power
of art or how to curtail a personal
crisis like I think he's brilliant he
plays the piano when he talks I see his
fingers move him like oh this guy's
channeling how brilliant but he's also
trained clinical psychologist so it's
more interesting to see a trained
clinical psychologist tackle religion
than it would be to see just a religious
scholar tackle religion because he
understands also temperament and
psychological motivations and
unconscious patterns and our thinking
and all these things and he can when he
brings that into his
take on religion it's very interesting
but in that same talk one at one of the
three talks were peterson and sam harris
were in debate i guess that the subject
of astronomy and astrology came up and
of course astronomy is a real science
astrology is not right and so sam harris
was clear about that and he's like look
you know astronomy allows us to study
the movements of the planets and it's an
empirical science and we've learned a
lot from it and so on and so forth
whereas you know some people may be like
lead their lives by astrological signs
and that this is a total pseudoscience
and therefore should be dismissed and
look I get that point that that is a
valid statement in many ways but then
Jordan speeders Jordan Pearson's answer
was very interesting because just just
what Sam Harris said alone about
astrology being a form of magical
thinking therefore not useful and not
not comparable to real science like
astronomy there's truth there but is
there like a third answer here you know
and that's where Jordan Peterson's
answer was very interesting he said well
well you think about what astrology is
is astrology was astronomy in its
earlier form that essentially you know
here we were these these questioning
thinking early human humanoids
in a world that we didn't understand a
world that was fundamentally
incomprehensible and so what do we do we
looked up at the stars we didn't
understand anything and so what we did
is we looked up at the stars and we
draped we draped the cosmos with our own
consciousness which is similar to what
we do with cinema all right I mean
cinema reflects mankind's historical
drive to manifest as consciousness
outside of his eye outside of his mind
in front of his eyes alright cinema is
our own mind looking back at us but
that's so earliest Riley astrology we
looked at the cosmos he said and then we
draped it with our consciousness mm-hmm
so we we turned our minds inside-out and
placed our drama out in the world and
labeled the star
as gods and goddesses and all the
fundamental archetypal human dramas were
unfolding in this domain of the gods but
guess what that fiction right that
fiction was enough for these early
sailors for example who were like
[__] starship explorers before we had
[__] satellite communication draping
the Stars with with our minds and
calling something the North Star and
that was sufficient for us to get on
these boats and sail into the great
abyss you know and so it may have been a
fiction but it is a fiction that willed
us into action in which we bared the
burden of not knowing and contending
with the unknown and taking off into the
darkness and how could we ever dismiss
that as not being like fundamentally
wonderful yes and that's that's some I'm
paraphrasing what he said but I thought
holy [__] pretty [__] good
paraphrasing bored that to me is is
really interesting in and it has become
the or maybe it's always been the
central question of my life which is the
ability that we have as humans to
communicate through I think of it as as
film but storytelling right so how do we
communicate going back to your
scientific versus poetic truth so impact
Theory was born because I realized that
2% of the world if I just look at you
and I tell you think this way act this
way step one two three four do these
things and I know that while it's never
gonna have a universal addictive outcome
it's it's predictable in a lot of people
just based on human biology yeah but
there's 98 98 percent of the [__]
world is only going to respond if I can
hit them at an emotional level if I'm
able to grab their attention so when you
were describing like media as I read
pass something what's really happening
is for whatever reason a certain idea
either hits me emotionally or does not
if it hits me emotionally becomes part
of me getting back to how do you
synthesize these ideas something really
has to hit me emotionally for it to
disrupt my current level of thinking so
going back I mean this is all sort of
coming together now to the
of our conversation like what are the
things that gobsmacked you that really
make you recontextualize yourself
rethink of your own knowledge and for me
it's things that hit you at an emotional
level so when I think about it even that
is still have that has to do with
pattern recognition like even something
hitting you emotionally is because the
dots are connecting in a certain way
that's triggering some association
that's making you respond to that but it
has to do also with your filters of
pattern recognition so the brain is a is
doing two things at once it's inhibiting
your response to the incoming data and
it's searching for meaningful
connections and it has to do that
because if your brain didn't inhibit
you'd be overwhelmed by all the
information coming and you'd be
incoherent you'd be schizophrenic like
you everything that's what schizophrenia
is everything is embedded with meaning
all the time so it's like this sign is
the Illuminati and they're spying on me
and that camera is surveillance and the
AI you know I mean like that's what
that's that's the the disease of them of
that kind of mental illness where they
see meaning everywhere and so we have to
inhibit and filter out what we determine
is being fundamentally unmeaning 'fl but
in some sense schizophrenics are
suffering from the truth it's just that
the truth doesn't let us do anything
with it because everything is meaningful
right all of this is made of atoms
this is powered by electricity that's
meaningful this is a beautiful design
that incorporates mathematics that makes
us stand like this you know that light
is powered by electricity which is also
meaning that television is that ever I
mean everything is meaningful but we
can't engage with everything all the
time so we inhibit but that inhibitory
muscle in order to concentrate in order
to focus in order to get things down can
also metastasize and can make us go uh
so once in a while we throw ourselves
into new environments because new
environments are more likely to register
something emotionally meaningful it's
more likely to do that particularly
because you don't have it already map
you can cuz it's all new but you also
that's just the external work of putting
yourself in a new place the other thing
is what agents do you introduce
internally to make you to heighten
pattern recognition and make you more
receptive for something to register
emotion
for example marijuana does that the
first thing that marijuana the first
thing that marijuana does is flood you
with dopamine which increases pattern
recognition
some people get paranoid or anxious when
they're on pot because the first thing
that happens when they start getting
more signals is they interpret those
signals as anxiety inducing because
they're just they're getting too much
data they don't know what to do with it
but maybe that's just they smoke too
much pot you know a little less pot and
the right environment might flood them
with the same dopamine but instead
they're getting this dopamine hit at a
pace they can absorb and then they start
connecting the dots in a new way without
being overwhelmed and then it can be
real positive and then whatever's in
front of you is more likely to register
emotionally and then you're like holy
[__] I'm getting all these interesting
ideas and then uh and so maybe it's not
pop maybe it's meditation maybe it's
doing the [__] cold shower plunge for
15 minutes before you know opening up
these this book to see if it engages you
just something that's gonna prime you to
be more open and more receptive right
and one of the descriptions of the
phenomenology phenomenological effects
of cannabis is that anything what is
that phenomenology is like subjectivity
phenomenology is the study of like first
person I've experienced from inside out
is that cannabis and again I think
anything that cultivates a capacity to
be present will do this but that
cannabis increases reactivity to stimuli
both from within and from without so
when you make yourself more porous to
the incoming signals your disinhibited
the inhibitory functions of the mind
you're making yourself a little more I
don't want to say crazy but you're
making yourself a little more like a
person who's paying attention to the
seemingly irrelevant and then connecting
the dots in a new way
that's why creative people flirt with
crazy people in that sense because crazy
is simply no inhibition whatsoever and
so everything is coming in and disor in
a disorganized manner right but like
creativity is also disinhibited somewhat
and I think these things exist on a
spectrum so what you want to do it it's
not like on/off what you want to be able
to kind of move the knob
and bring it to a place where you're
like getting more pattern recognition
but not to a place where you're seeing
pattern isset e and c patterns where
there are none and that's a different
thing but there are both on a spectrum
right here is very limited things are
connecting for you you're very very very
sober here it's like oh the dots are
connecting I'm seeing increased
information and increased data but it's
at a rate that's interpretable and
useful and then all the way up here it's
like okay I'm seeing patterns everywhere
and this is like somebody who got too
stoned at a party and it's getting
really paranoid because they think
everybody can tell they're high that's
really just them miss reading a
situation because they have too much
dopamine and too much pattern
recognition and so they're actually
seeing patterns that aren't there so
interesting I wish we'd hit me like that
like when I hear people for whom it
really works and talk about it I'm like
ah man that sounds amazing and then I
try it and it just it it feels like
someone is pressing play and pause on my
brain it doesn't feel like I have some
cool new amount of stuff coming in yeah
and actually one of the ways it makes me
feel and this comes back to what I was
saying about speaking to people on an
emotional level I don't I don't have any
intellectual experience with the anxiety
it is purely a sense deep in my body of
unease and what I like about speaking to
somebody emotional is you're speaking to
the body and the body is a lot harder to
ignore than the mind and once you've got
somebody at a body level where they feel
it's something visceral they may not
even know how to interpret it but they
have that feeling this is why I think
it's so critical that at impact theory
we develop the ability to communicate in
the language of emotion so going back to
what you're saying about you've got
science and you've got the poetry but
I'll say poetry is the link of emotion
it's a body talk it's getting to
somebody in a way that they feel far
more in a then just in a way that they
understand and because I think humans
are so different and because I think so
few people have done the work to connect
the mind in the body so that they can
interpret the signals it's like the only
way to grab their [__] attention is
to make them feel something to give them
the chills to make them sad to make them
laugh to make them happy whatever and
then I think it has the priming effect
that you're talking of making them more
porous so that the ideas can come in and
I don't know if it's just it sort of
bumps them into a
slightly different state of course it
does of course I that's where it gets
interesting and when I think about how
much in my life I've been influenced by
movies because they lower my defenses
like I remember when I saw the matrix
yeah
the before it hit theaters I got a
ticket to go see it at Warner Brothers
Studios and I had never once ever in my
life made noise during a movie other
than to laugh yeah and when Trinity
jumps up and the camera moves around her
I screamed out loud and as I'm screaming
realized everyone else in the theatre is
screaming and I realized that's not true
at the time I didn't realize [__] I was
just going for a ride but now looking
back I realized whoa like I was just in
a different place for me to be screaming
before I even realize that I'm screaming
yeah you you get to that notion you say
of dis dis inhibiting people well that's
that's the function of the the movie
theater having a massive screen high
fidelity surround sound violating your
expectations with a counterintuitive
narrative because when a film is
formulaic and predictable and it doesn't
violate your expectations and so you go
uh you know what this film is so when a
film does all those things when it
deploys the tools of counterintuitive
original storytelling massively
amplified sound and sight and image
comfortable chair in the dark so you're
not self-conscious about how you come
across when you're reacting to what's
happening I'm telling you if movies were
watched with the lights on people
wouldn't get as immersed yeah all those
things are performing the same function
as what the cannabis example I was
saying before of increasing your
reactivity to the stimuli both from
within and from without right because so
your own thoughts and responses and your
own capacity to absorb what's coming in
cannabis is just like adding Astroglide
to that so that you're you're allowing
you're allowing the cinema you're
allowing the cinema to literally like I
can't even you but but I hate to be so
so violent I love it but it's like it's
like you want the film to like to
penetrate you right and so and so and so
any narrative anything I literally can
hold on to it too when if I'm high I
can't say hi am i watching the Munoz cuz
you were too high I will let you dictate
the dos because I would love something
yeah and I don't I would obviously
prefer it be internal but I don't mind
exogenous I'm very open yeah if it is
reliably effective yes I'm all for it
and I just yeah I don't know man and I
am trust me when I'm say when I say I am
very open to I'm just doing it wrong
super oh yeah cool look I think I think
I think that the way to you to think of
all of these things is as tools right
like you can learn to talk without a
microphone man but sometimes and I don't
know if you're gonna do this on this
show but I recommend getting your
headphones headphones for both you and
the guest it's super weird yeah in a
great way some people find it weird but
I was gonna say what that does is it
allows you to hear yourself amplified in
your own ears and that feedback loop
actually makes your speech in my case
more precise that's somehow the the echo
effect of hearing myself here makes the
nuance of every word more interesting
and makes me less likely to feel
pressured to come up with an original
way of saying something because just the
off-the-cuff quality of human language
becomes enough and somehow it somehow it
disarms me even more that's just a
thought I had but again this is a tool
right you don't need this to a bicycle
right you can walk and train your calves
and run and jog and do all those things
you don't need the bicycle but the
bicycle is just a different instrument
and through riding the bicycle you
interface with the world differently and
I'm not saying you should be dependent
on the bicycle like walk to but
sometimes you want to bring the bicycle
in because it's different you know and
so think of think of all these things as
that microphones the guitar amplifier
you can play the acoustic guitar
sometimes you want the electric guitar
I'm not saying that cannabis or MDMA for
therapy are things we need to depend on
but I think they're tools that are
coming out of the closet and being
legitimized as effective lifestyle tools
that we can deploy to help heal
ourselves you know man I cannot think of
a bet
placed and we got a rap Sunday you gotta
get the [__] out of here but dude thank
you so much for kicking this off and and
just being you this is so much fun I
cannot believe how fast the time went so
dude I want to salute you and celebrate
you thank you for having me it's it's an
honor
I am your hustle and your muscle and
your scale is is beautiful and admirable
and I just I just wanna I just want to
thank you for including me because I
often feel not impostor syndrome but
there's definitely a sense somehow of
like you know what if I don't deliver
takeaways what if people don't you know
don't learn anything other than here the
spectacle that is me talking but then
but then like you make me feel welcome
and and I just really appreciate that
dude you're welcome here anytime my
friend and thanks is there anything you
want to tell people about before you go
yes follow me on the interwebs I always
like to engage with people on my social
channels I'm Facebook is great at Jason
L Silva Instagram I hear is the one to
focus on these days I am trying to grow
that as well so at Jason L Silva on
Instagram as well any a shots of on
YouTube I'm gonna be producing a six
episode limited run video podcast
conversation thing with a couple of
people I don't know how you have the
stamina to do this all the time I bow
down before you but I'm gonna be
recording probably six conversations one
of the people is gonna be Michael Pollan
so keep an eye out for that where and
what's it gonna be called probably flow
sessions I'm gonna do podcasts and
YouTube
it'll be video conversations but just
just six episodes but um I think it's
for people who want to see me maybe
unpack some of the ideas with some of
the people I often quote yes that's kind
of how we're picking some of the people
and like that's fine who are the most
let's look through my footage who are
the people
quote the most and let's have me then
like engage with them and see if we can
get somewhere deeper so that should be
interesting - that will be really
interesting yep
count me in man thanks bro awesome
beautiful thanks again thanks for having
me peace out everybody later the
neurotic is precisely the one who cannot
create and so he chokes in his
introversion that's actually interesting
yeah but the neurotic and the artist are
both super sensitive they both taken the
world with intensity
but again the neurotic cannot create so
he chokes on his intro versions whereas
the artist takes in the world and
reworks it into his art